docs: add blog post about using Keptn within Argo Workflows (#3487)
keptn/lifecycle-toolkit: docs/blog/posts/using-keptn-analyses-in-argo-workflows.md

---

> date: 2024-05-04

Author: good catch, will adapt it

afterward using the [Keptn Analysis](../../docs/reference/crd-reference/analysis.md) feature.
Argo Workflows is a workflow orchestration engine built for Kubernetes, which makes it a perfect fit
to be used together with Keptn.
We will achieve this by using the support for [Executor Plugins](https://argo-workflows.readthedocs.io/en/latest/executor_plugins/)
provided by Argo Workflows.
This plugin mechanism is an easy way of integrating custom functionality into an Argo Workflow,
and providing further nodes in the workflow with valuable information, such as the outcome of a Keptn Analysis.

<!-- more -->

## Technologies used for this example

For this, we are using the following technologies:

- The [Keptn Analysis](../../docs/reference/crd-reference/analysis.md) resource
  defines goals for our metrics and evaluates them.
- [Argo Workflows](https://argoproj.github.io/workflows/) is the workflow engine.
- [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io): Provides monitoring data for the application.

## Architecture

The overall architecture of this example is depicted in the diagram below:

![Architecture](./using-keptn-analyses-in-argo-workflows/workflow.png)

> Our example workflow exists of two nodes, which do the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our example workflow consists of two nodes, which do the following:
```

> - The **Load Tests** node creates a `KeptnTask` that executes load tests against

Reviewer 2: Style question for the team: Should this be "...creates a `KeptnTask` resource that executes..."?  I think @odubajDT and @mowies  had requested this in other docs.

The next step is to install the [Keptn extension for Argo Workflows (unofficial PoC implementation)](https://github.com/bacherfl/argo-keptn-plugin).
This is done by applying the `ConfigMap` that enables the plugin within Argo workflows,
and the required RBAC configuration for the plugin to be able to interact
with Keptn resources:

```shell
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bacherfl/argo-keptn-plugin/main/config/keptn-executor-plugin-configmap.yaml
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bacherfl/argo-keptn-plugin/main/config/rbac.yaml
```

## Defining the load test KeptnTaskDefinition

The load tests against our sample application are executed
using a `KeptnTask`.
The related `KeptnTaskDefinition` looks as follows:

```yaml
{% include "./using-keptn-analyses-in-argo-workflows/load-generator-task.yaml" %}
```

This task simply creates some load by sending a curl request
to the sample application for a duration of one minute.

## Defining the AnalysisValueTemplates

Now we are going to define the queries for the metrics we would like to analyse:

- The response time of the demo service
- The error rate of the demo service

> Below are the `AnalysisValueTemplate` definitions, as well as the

Reviewer 2: "resources" is also confusing here.  Could try "definitions for the `AnalysisValueTemplate` resource" or "`AnalysisValueTemplate` values"

- The **Analyse Results** node takes the time frame of the executed load tests as an input parameter
and creates a Keptn `Analysis` for the given timeframe.
Using a `KeptnMetricsProvider` which retrieves the metrics for the application from Prometheus,
the metric values relevant for the analysis are retrieved and evaluated.
The result of the Analysis is then reported back to Argo Workflows which can then pass
on the Analysis results to other potential nodes in the workflow.

Both of the workflow nodes are executed using a simple Argo Workflow executor plugin
hosted in [this repo](https://github.com/bacherfl/argo-keptn-plugin).
Note however, that the code in this repo is just a proof of concept and not
intended for use in production.

## Setting up the environment

In this example, we assume that both Keptn and Argo Workflows are
already installed on our cluster.
If this is not the case, and you would like to follow this example,
please follow the instructions at the respective installation guides:

- [Keptn Installation Guide](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/installation/)
- [Argo Workflows Installation Guide](https://argo-workflows.readthedocs.io/en/latest/quick-start/)

> The next step is to install the [Keptn extension for Argo Workflows (unofficial PoC implementation)](https://github.com/bacherfl/argo-keptn-plugin).

Reviewer 2: Is that coding right?  I think `unofficial PoC implementation` should be in square brackets rather than parentheses and it looks like a stray `]` in the middle of the link but would markdownlint not flag that?  I can't find the rendered document in readthedocs to see if it is playing out correctly, alas

Author: seems like it's rendered correctly in the preview

This is done by applying the `ConfigMap` that enables the plugin within Argo workflows,
and the required RBAC configuration for the plugin to be able to interact
with Keptn resources:

```shell
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bacherfl/argo-keptn-plugin/main/config/keptn-executor-plugin-configmap.yaml
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bacherfl/argo-keptn-plugin/main/config/rbac.yaml
```

## Defining the load test KeptnTaskDefinition

The load tests against our sample application are executed
using a `KeptnTask`.
The related `KeptnTaskDefinition` looks as follows:

```yaml
{% include "./using-keptn-analyses-in-argo-workflows/load-generator-task.yaml" %}
```

> This task will simply create some load by sending a curl request

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This task simply creates some load by sending a curl request
```

to the sample application for a duration of one minute.

## Defining the AnalysisValueTemplates

Now we are going to define the queries for the metrics we would like to analyse:

- The response time of the demo service
- The error rate of the demo service

Below are the `AnalysisValueTemplate` definitions, as well as the

> `KeptnMetricsProvider` which points to the Prometheus API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`KeptnMetricsProvider` resource that points to the Prometheus API
```

inside our cluster:

```yaml
{% include "./using-keptn-analyses-in-argo-workflows/metrics.yaml" %}
```

Next, we define the `AnalysisDefinition` resource that contains the goals
for the metrics mentioned above:

```yaml
{% include "./using-keptn-analyses-in-argo-workflows/analysisdefinition.yaml" %}

> ```

Reviewer 2: What about providing a bit of prose that describes what the analysis does -- like what causes pass/fail/warning and explain how the calculation is done to determine the final score.  And what about maybe using different weights and a `keyObjective`?  It's a chance to introduce people to the power of the Analysis feature.

Author: I was considering going more into detail here, but since we already have another blog post explaining the Analysis feature (https://keptn.sh/stable/blog/2023/12/19/application-performance-analysis-with-keptn/) in more detail I decided to keep it really simple here and focus more on how this could be integrated into Argo Workflows

Reviewer 2: What about a high-level statement like "You can use the Analysis feature to define the logic for sophisticated examinations by specifying different weights for different targets, specifying targets whose failure should fail the entire analysis no matter what the score is, and so forth.  See <other blog> for more details."  You can certainly improve on my prose -- the general idea is to say that more sophistication is possible without diverting the flow of what you are doing here.  Just a thought -- you can reject it by marking this conversation as resolved.

Author: I added a link to the previous blog post to highlight that there are more possibilities

Reviewer 2: I like it!

## Putting it all together

Now that we have defined our Keptn resources for executing
load tests and analysing the performance of our application,
it is time to put everything together by defining the

> Argo Workflow, which looks as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Argo Workflow, which looks like the following:
```

```yaml
{% include "./using-keptn-analyses-in-argo-workflows/argo-workflow.yaml" %}
```

This workflow contains the following steps:

- **execute-load-tests:** Starts a new instance of a `KeptnTask` based on the `loadtests`

> `KeptnTaskDefinition` we have created earlier.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`KeptnTaskDefinition` we created earlier.
```

> The result of the step contains the `start` and `end` timestamps of the executed load tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The result of this step contains the `start` and `end` timestamps of the executed load tests.
```

- **keptn-analysis:** Runs after the previous node is completed, and accepts the reported
`start` and `end` timestamps as input parameters.
This interval is used to create a new instance of an `Analysis` where the response time
and error rate during this interval is evaluated, using the `AnalysisDefinition` created earlier.
The overall result (i.e. whether the `Analysis` has passed or not), as well as a detailed breakdown

> of each objective in JSON format is reported back to argo in the results of the step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of each objective in JSON format is reported back to Argo in the results of the step.
```

> - **print-result:** Takes bot the `start` and `end` timestamps of the load tests, as well

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **print-result:** Takes both the `start` and `end` timestamps of the load tests, as well
```

as the overall `result` of the `Analysis` as input parameters, and prints a message containing
the result.
- **print-json**: Takes the JSON object containing the
analysis objective breakdown of the `keptn-analysis` as an input parameter,
and stores the received JSON object as an artifact.

> This enables other nodes in a workflow to retrieve that artifact and use the information
> in there as input artifacts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This enables other nodes in a workflow to retrieve that artifact and use the information in it
as input artifacts.
```

Read more about the concept of artifacts in Argo Workflows [here](https://argo-workflows.readthedocs.io/en/latest/walk-through/artifacts/).

## Executing the workflow

The workflow is triggered by navigating to the Argo Workflows UI
and choosing the **Submit new Workflow** option:

![Triggering the workflows](./using-keptn-analyses-in-argo-workflows/triggering-workflow.png)

After some time, all steps in the workflow are completed,
and both the time frame of the load test execution,
and the result of the `Analysis` are visible in
the Argo Workflows UI:

![Workflow result](./using-keptn-analyses-in-argo-workflows/workflow-result.png)

## Conclusion

In this article we have explored the potential of using Keptn

> to both perform tasks, and analyse performance metrics

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to both perform tasks and analyse performance metrics
```

> within Argo Workflows, and pass on the obtained results
> to the following steps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
within Argo Workflows, and pass the results on to the following steps.
```

> Hopefully this article provided you with some inspiration of
> how you could make use of Keptn yourself within Argo Workflows -

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Hopefully this article provides you with some inspiration of
how you can make use of Keptn within Argo Workflows -
```

> If yes, we would love to hear about it, and we are always happy
> about any feedback.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If so, we would love to hear about it, and we always welcome any feedback.
```

> Also in case you have some questions or run into any kind of issues,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have questions or run into any kind of issues,
```
